Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like these
videos, please subscribe to follow along with the
series. Also, please like and leave a comment,
and share the video to help spread this
free series of videos. Thanks for your help.
In this video we will cover SNMP, the
Simple Network Management Protocol.
SNMP is mentioned in exam topic 4.4, which says
you must be able to explain the function of SNMP
in network operations. So, you don’t need
to know the detailed workings of SNMP,
know how to set up an SNMP server,
how to configure SNMP, etc.
Basically, you just need to know its
role and purpose in network operations.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First I’ll give an overview of SNMP,
its purpose, how it works, etc.
Then I’ll introduce the different
versions of SNMP. There have actually been many
different versions developed over the years,
however you only really need to know 3 of them.
I’ll also give an overview of the different
messages SNMP uses to fulfill its purpose.
And finally, some very basic SNMP configurations.
Although the exam topics don’t list SNMP
configuration as a requirement, I think it’s a
good idea to learn some very basic commands which
we will then try out in the next lab video.
Watch until the end of the video for a bonus
practice question from Boson Software’s ExSim
for CCNA, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
So let me give you an overview of SNMP. SNMP is
an industry-standard framework and protocol that
was originally released in 1988. Most people think
of SNMP as a single protocol, but actually it fits
into a larger framework of network management,
sometimes called the SNMP framework. The first
RFC was RFC 1065, structure and identification of
management information for TCP/IP-based internets.
I think I mentioned RFCs, Requests For Comments,
at some point earlier in the course. These are
how the IETF, Internet Engineering Task
Force, defines standards for the Internet.
The next RFC for SNMP was RFC 1066, management
information base for network management of
TCP/IP-based internets. And one more, RFC
1067, a simple network management protocol.
These three RFCs together make up SNMP version
1. There have been many more RFCs since then
defining other versions of SNMP, a few of
which I’ll introduce later in this video.
By the way, you don’t have to memorize these
RFCs, I’m just giving a little history.
Don’t let the ‘simple’ in the name fool
you! Although SNMPv1 was relatively simply
compared to the later versions, the current
version SNMPv3 is actually fairly complicated.
I know I still have a lot to learn about SNMP.
Fortunately, for the CCNA or even the CCNP
you don’t need to know all the details, but you
do need to understand the purpose and basics of
SNMP. SNMP can be used to monitor the status
of devices, make configuration changes, etc.
There are two main types of devices in SNMP.
First, there are the managed devices. These are
the devices being managed using SNMP. For example,
network devices like routers and switches.
We can use SNMP to monitor the status of
the routers and switches in our networks.
And the second type is the Network Management
Station, NMS. You might also hear Network
Management System, instead of Station.
It’s the same thing. This is the device,
or devices, managing the managed devices I
mentioned above. This is the SNMP ‘server’,
although typically we use the
term NMS instead of SNMP server.
Let’s look more at how SNMP works. In this
network, SRV1 is the NMS, Network Management
Station or System. We’re using SNMP to manage R1
and SW1, so they are the managed devices. There
are three main operations used in SNMP, three main
ways SNMP can be used to help manage a network.
The first one is that managed
devices can notify the NMS of events.
For example, perhaps SW1’s G0/1 interface had a
hardware failure and it’s status changed to DOWN.
It can send an SNMP message to the NMS, SRV1,
telling it that the G0/1 interface has gone down.
The actual SNMP software on the server, or
the NMS, might be configured to notify the
network administrator to inform
them of this event, for example.
Okay, so managed devices can notify the NMS of
events such as interfaces going up and down.
The NMS can also ask the managed devices
for information about their status.
For example, perhaps the NMS, SRV1,
asks R1 what its current CPU usage is.
You want to make sure your network devices
aren’t being overloaded and working too hard.
R1 will then reply to the NMS, for example
telling SRV1 that its CPU usage is at 50%.
So, that’s another function of SNMP.
And one more main operation used by SNMP is
when the NMS tells the managed devices to change
aspects of their configuration. For example,
let’s say the IP address of R1’s G0/1 interface
is 203.0.113.1/30. The NMS can tell R1 to
change that IP address to 203.0.113.5/30.
R1 will change the IP address
and tell the NMS that it did so.
So, those are the three main operations used
in SNMP. The managed devices can notify the
NMS of events, the NMS can ask managed devices
for information about their current status,
and the NMS can also tell the managed
devices to change their configuration.
Now let’s look a little deeper
into how this all works.
These are the main components of SNMP.
Up top there is the NMS from the
previous network diagram, SRV1.
On the bottom, the two managed devices, SW1 and
R1. Let me break this diagram down step by step.
First, the components of the NMS. Let this green
section represent the SNMP software on the NMS.
The NMS probably isn’t a machine dedicated
to SNMP. It could just be the network admin’s
PC which is running SNMP software. So, what
components are there in the NMS’s SNMP software?
First, the SNMP Manager is the SNMP software on
the NMS that interacts with the managed devices.
It receives notifications, sends requests for
information, sends configuration changes, etc.
Next there is an SNMP application, this is
the application that provides an interface
for the network admin to interact
with. It displays alerts,
statistics, charts, etc. Here’s what an
SNMP Application might look like. There are
plenty of free and commercial SNMP applications
available. This screenshot is from SolarWinds.
Next, let’s look at the managed devices, SW1
and R1 from our example before. This blue area
represents the SNMP entity on the managed
devices. These devices are a router and a switch,
so of course SNMP is just a part of what’s running
on these devices. The first component is the SNMP
Agent. This is the SNMP software running on the
managed devices that interacts with the SNMP
Manager on the NMS. It sends notifications
to and receives messages from the NMS.
Another important component is the
MIB, Management Information Base.
This is the structure that contains the variables
that are managed by SNMP. Each of these variables
is identified with an Object ID, OID. Some
examples of variables stored in the MIB
are the status of each interface on
the device, the traffic throughput,
CPU usage, device temperature, etc. Each of
these will have their own OID to identify them.
So, that’s the basic structure of SNMP. Then,
the SNMP messages exchanged between the agent
and manager make SNMP work. Now before moving on
to introduce the different SNMP versions, let me
briefly introduce those Object IDs, OIDs, that are
organized in the Management Information Base, MIB.
SNMP Object IDs are organized in a hierarchical
structure. Here’s an example of an OID, and here’s
how it breaks down. iso, identified-organization,
dod, internet, mgmt, mib-2, system,
and sysName. So, this OID is used to identify the
system name, the host name, of the managed device.
For example, here’s that same network again.
The NMS asks one of the managed devices, SW1,
what value do you have for this OID? SW1 then
replies, telling the NMS its host name. There are
countless different OIDs. If you want to explore
some different OIDs you can take a look around
oid-info.com. That’s how I got the OID information
for the system name OID I used as an example here.
Now let me give a brief overview of the major
SNMP versions. Many versions of SNMP have been
proposed and developed, however only three
major versions have achieved wide-spread use.
The first is SNMPv1, this is the original version
of SNMP. The next version is SNMPv2c. There are
multiple versions of SNMPv2, but v2c is the most
widely used. Version 2 added another message type
which allows the NMS to retrieve large amounts
of information from a managed device using a
single request, making it much more efficient,
there is less unnecessary network traffic.
The ‘c’ in the name refers to the ‘community
strings’, which are passwords that were used
in SNMPv1, removed from SNMPv2, and
then added back for this version,
SNMPv2c. When we take a look at SNMP
configuration I’ll use version 2c to
demonstrate, so you’ll see how these community
strings work. Basically they’re just passwords.
Okay, the next major version and
the best version so far is SNMPv3.
It is a much more secure version of SNMP that
supports strong encryption and authentication.
I’ll talk more about those terms in
the security section of this course,
but basically it means that SNMPv3 makes
sure that only the intended devices can
read the SNMP messages, they can’t be
intercepted and read by an attacker.
Now let’s look at the SNMP message types. In this
chart I’ve listed the four message classes: read,
write, notification, and response. I’ve
also given a description of each class,
and then listed the actual
SNMP messages in each class.
First let’s take a look at the ‘read’ message
class. These messages are sent by the NMS to read
information from the managed devices. I already
showed a few examples before, like when SRV1
asked SW1 what its host name is. There are three
messages in this class, Get, GetNext, and GetBulk.
I think this is more depth than necessary for
the CCNA, so I’ll just give a very quick outline
of those messages. First up is the Get message.
It’s a request sent from the manager to the agent,
the NMS to the managed device, to
retrieve the value of a variable, an OID,
or multiple variables. The agent will send
a ‘Response’ message with the current value
of each variable. For example, our NMS here might
ask SW1, what’s the status of your G0/1 interface?
And SW1 responds with an SNMP ‘response’ message.
Another kind of SNMP ‘read’ message is GetNext. It
is sent from the manager to the agent to discover
the available variables in the MIB. Basically,
it says ‘tell me the next OID’, so it can be
used to discover what other OIDs are available.
There is also the GetBulk message, which is a more
efficient version of GetNext introduced in SNMPv2.
If you know the purpose of the basic Get
message, you’ll be fine for the CCNA.
So, those are the ‘read’ messages. Next up, the
‘write’ messages, and actually there is only one
kind of message, which is ‘Set’. These are sent
by the NMS to change information on the managed
devices, to change the value of a specific
variable, such as changing an IP address.
Just like with the Get message, I already
showed you an example of an SNMP Set message
when SRV1 made R1 change the IP
address of its G0/1 interface,
but I’ll demonstrate again. So, the Set message is
a request from the manager to the agent to change
the value of one or more variables. Then the agent
will send a Response message with the new values.
For example, SRV1 can send a Set message to SW1,
requesting that it change its host name to SW10.
SW1 will then change its host name, and send
a Response message with its new host name.
So, that’s the write message
class, with the Set message.
Next the ‘notification’ message class. These
are messages sent by the managed devices
to alert the NMS of a particular event,
for example when an interface goes down.
There are two different messages,
Trap and Inform. Let’s check them out.
First up, the Trap message. This is a
notification sent from the agent to the manager,
so the managed device to the NMS. The
manager does not send a Response message
to acknowledge that it received the
Trap, so these messages are unreliable.
Also, SNMP uses UDP, so there
are no TCP retransmissions.
Now, unless there’s some problem in the
network the Trap will reach the NMS no problem,
but since there is no reliability mechanism
built-in they are called unreliable messages.
I showed an example before, but here’s
another. SW1’s G0/0 interface went down,
so it sends a Trap message to the NMS,
SRV1. That’s it, no response is sent to SW1.
This Trap will probably appear as an
alert in the SNMP application on SRV1,
and perhaps it will send an email notification
to the network admin, or something like that.
Okay, the next kind of notification message is the
Inform message. It’s like a Trap message, but it
is acknowledged with a response message. So, even
though this message is sent with UDP, not TCP,
there is reliability built into the message
itself. If SW1 sends an Inform to SRV1, SRV1
will send a Response to tell SW1 that the Inform
was received. This message type was originally
used for communications between managers,
for networks with multiple SNMP managers.
However later updates to the protocol allow
agents to send Inform messages to managers, too.
So, those are the SNMP Trap and Inform messages.
Finally, the Response message class, with just
one message, Response. These are messages sent
in Response to a previous message or request.
For example, Get messages, Set messages, and
Inform messages. I just showed you some examples
of Response messages, so I think that’s enough for
now. So, those are the SNMP messages. I think the
information I just gave you will be more than
enough for the CCNA. I mentioned these port
numbers in the Day 30 video on TCP and UDP, but
SNMP Agents listen for messages on UDP port 161
and SNMP Managers listen for messages on UDP port
162. Make sure you remember those port numbers.
Now let me demonstrate some
basic SNMP configuration.
As I said before, SNMP configuration
isn’t mentioned in the exam topics list,
but I think getting a bit of hands-on practice
is always helpful, so let’s try it out. We won’t
cover setting up the NMS, that’s definitely
out-of-scope for the CCNA, but let’s see how
to set up the SNMP agent on a Cisco router. In
this network, R1 is the managed device, and PC1
is the NMS, running an SNMP application. First
I configured some optional information on R1,
giving some contact information and the location
of the device. This is optional information, you
don’t need to configure this. Then I configured
two community strings. As I mentioned before,
these are basically SNMP passwords. Notice
that I specified the community string Jeremy1
as RO, this means read only. So, an NMS using
this password can only read information from R1,
it can’t use Set to make any changes to R1.
On the other hand, I specified Jeremy2 as RW,
read/write. An NMS using this password will be
able to both read, using Get messages, and write,
using Set messages. Note that there are actually
default community strings, ‘public’ for RO
and ‘private’ for RW. So, if you don’t specify
community strings these will be used. Of course,
it’s best to configure the community strings and
not use the defaults, as they are less secure.
Then I specified the address of the NMS, PC1 at
192.168.1.1. In this command I also specified the
version and which community string to use with
this server. I configured Jeremy1, so PC1 will
be able to read information from R1, but it won’t
be able to use Set messages to make changes to R1.
So, the read/write community string Jeremy2
isn’t being used in this configuration.
Then I configured what kinds of traps to send to
the NMS. I specified LINKDOWN and LINKUP messages,
so if an interface goes up or down Traps
will be sent. I also specified config traps,
so for example if configuration changes
are made Traps will be sent. So,
that’s a simple SNMPv2c configuration. Let’s see
what happens when R1’s G0/1 interface goes down.
Here’s a Wireshark capture of the Trap that was
sent from R1 to the NMS, PC1. If you look at the
bottom, you’ll see numerous OIDs included in this
Trap. I looked up this OID using oid-info.com,
and as you can see it is a linkDown Trap,
notifying the NMS that R1’s interface went down.
Okay, now let’s look at some other fields of
this SNMP message. You can see the version of
2c that I configured. And here’s the community,
Jeremy1, the RO community string I configured.
Note that this community string, this password,
is displayed in plain text. In SNMPv1 and SNMPv2c,
there is no encryption. The community and
message contents are sent in plain-text.
This is not secure, as the packets
can easily be captured and read.
So, as I mentioned before SNMPv3 is
the preferred option. However SNMPv3
configuration is also more complicated, so for
this simple demonstration I selected version 2c.
So, before moving on to the quiz let me summarize
what we covered. SNMP helps manage devices over
a network. There are two main components of
SNMP. The managed devices are the devices being
managed using SNMP, such as network devices,
for example routers, switches, and firewalls.
The network management stations, NMS, are
the SNMP servers that manage the devices.
The NMS receives notifications from managed
devices. It can change the settings on managed
devices. It can also check on the status of
managed devices. Variables such as interface
status, temperature, traffic load, host name,
etc, are stored in the MIB of the managed devices,
and each variable is identified using an object
ID, OID. There are three main SNMP versions:
version 1, version 2c, and version 3. Version 3
is preferred because it is more secure than the
previous versions, providing encryption
and authentication of SNMP messages.
And these are the SNMP messages we covered: Get,
GetNext, GetBulk, Set, Trap, Inform, and Response.
Okay, that should be more than enough
information about SNMP for the CCNA.
Remember, the exam topics state you need to
know the function of SNMP in network operations.
There’s a lot more that can be learned about
SNMP, of course, but I’ll leave it here.
As always, make sure to watch until the end of
the quiz for a bonus practice question from Boson
Software’s ExSim, the best practice exams for the
CCNA. Okay, let’s go to question 1 of the quiz.
Which of the following SNMP
messages are used by the NMS
to ‘read’ information from the managed
devices? (select all that apply)
Here are the options. Pause the
video to think about the answers.
The answers are D, Get, and G,
GetNext. In addition to these,
there is also the GetBulk message which is used
to read information from the managed devices.
By the way, F, SetBulk, is not a real SNMP
message type. Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following SNMP
messages are sent to UDP port 162?
Select all that apply. Here are the options.
Pause the video to think about your answers.
The answers are A, Inform, and B, Trap. The
NMS listens on UDP port 162 for SNMP messages.
Informs and Traps are both sent from the managed
devices to the NMS, to they are sent to port 162.
Set and Get messages are sent from
the NMS to the managed devices,
which listen on port 161, so they are
incorrect. Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following SNMP message
types was introduced in SNMPv2
and allows mass-retrieval of
information from managed devices?
Here are the options. Pause the
video to think about the answer.
The answer is D, GetBulk. GetBulk is like an
optimized version of GetNext, allowing the
NMS to discover the variables in the MIB of the
managed devices. Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following pieces
of software runs on an SNMP NMS?
Here are the options. Pause the
video to think about your answer.
The answer is C, the SNMP Manager.
This is the software that interacts with
the SNMP Agent on the managed devices. It
sends SNMP messages to and receives messages
from the Agent. Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following SNMP messages
is sent without expecting a Response?
Here are the options. Pause the
video to think about your answer.
The answer is D, Trap. Traps are messages sent
by SNMP managed devices to the NMS. Trap messages
aren’t acknowledged with a Response, so they are
considered unreliable. Even if the message is lost
in transmit for some reason, the managed device
won’t send the Trap again. Okay, that’s all for
the quiz. Next let’s take a look at a bonus
question in Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
Okay here's today's Boson ExSim practice question.
Which of the following SNMP actions are used by an
NMS to extract information from an SNMP agent?
Select 2 choices. So here are the choices,
we have Inform, Trap, GetNext, Set, and Get. So
pause the video now to think about the answers.
Okay so let's check. So it's asking us which of
these SNMP actions, or messages, are used by an
NMS, that's the network management station, the
server, to extract information from an SNMP agent,
a managed device? So these first two choices,
Inform and Trap, are definitely incorrect. These
messages are sent from the SNMP agent, the managed
device, to the NMS. So A and B are incorrect. C,
D, and E are all sent from the NMS to the
managed device. GetNext is used to get the name,
or the object ID, of the next object, the next
variable, in the MIB. So, this helps the NMS
to discover what objects, what OIDs, are in the
management information base of the managed device.
So I think that is one of the correct
answers, that is used to extract information
from an SNMP agent. Now, Set is used to
change a variable on an agent. So it's not
used to extract information, it's used to change
information. So I think D is incorrect. And then E
is used to get the value of one of the variables,
one of the OIDs, in the MIB of the SNMP agent. So
I think E is correct also. So the two correct
answers should be C and E. So, you can check
the answers in Boson ExSim by clicking on 'show
answer'. And those are the two correct answers.
So here is Boson's explanation, including an
explanation of all of the SNMP message types
I mentioned in this video. You can pause
the video now to read the explanation.
And there is more down here,
with some output from Cisco IOS.
And here. And there's also a
reference to some Cisco documentation
about the SNMP Get message type.
Okay so that was a look at Boson Software's ExSim
for CCNA. As I have said before, these are by far
the best practice exams for the CCNA, and they are
the ones I used myself a few years ago to study
for my CCNA exam. If you want to get Boson ExSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
There are supplementary materials for
this video. There is a flashcard deck
to use with the software ‘Anki’. There
will also be a packet tracer practice lab
so you can get some hands-on
practice. That will be in the
next video. Sign up for my mailing
list via the link in the description,
and I’ll send you all of the flashcards
and packet tracer lab files for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want
to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button under
the video. Thank you to H W, Brandon, Samil,
Aaron, Tech Alameda, Marcel, Magrathea, Kone,
Donald, C Mohd, Gustavo, Anthony, Biraj, Junhong,
Benjamin, Tshepiso, Justin, Prakaash, Nasir,
Erlison, Apogee, Marko, Daming, Jhilmar, Ed,
Value, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Mark, Yousif,
Boson Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at the time
of recording by the way, February 6th 2021. If
you signed up recently and your name isn’t on
here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.